# Astropolis Data Tables

[General Notes](#General-Notes)  
[achievements.tsv](#achievementstsv)  
[advancements.tsv](#advancementstsv)  
[asset_adjustments_mod.tsv](#asset_adjustments_modtsv)  
[carrying_capacity_groups.tsv](#carrying_capacity_groupstsv)  
[compositions.tsv](#compositionstsv)  
[compositions_resources_deposits.tsv](#compositions_resources_depositstsv)  
[compositions_resources_proportions.tsv](#compositions_resources_proportionstsv)  
[compositions_resources_variances.tsv](#compositions_resources_variancestsv)  
[facilities.tsv](#facilitiestsv)  
[facilities_inventories.tsv](#facilities_inventoriestsv)  
[facilities_operations_capacities.tsv](#facilities_operations_capacitiestsv)  
[facilities_operations_capacity_factors.tsv](#facilities_operations_capacity_factorstsv)  
[facilities_operations_extractions.tsv](#facilities_operations_extractionstsv)  
[facilities_populations.tsv](#facilities_populationstsv)  
[major_strata.tsv](#major_stratatsv)  
[mod_classes.tsv](#mod_classestsv)  
[modules.tsv](#modulestsv)  
[moons_mod.tsv](#moons_modtsv)  
[op_classes.tsv](#op_classestsv)  
[op_groups.tsv](#op_groupstsv)  
[operations.tsv](#operationstsv)  
[planets_mod.tsv](#planets_modtsv)  
[players.tsv](#playerstsv)  
[populations.tsv](#populationstsv)  
[processes.tsv](#processestsv)  
[resource_classes.tsv](#resource_classestsv)  
[resources.tsv](#resourcestsv)  
[spacecrafts.tsv](#spacecraftstsv)  
[strata.tsv](#stratatsv)  
[surveys.tsv](#surveystsv)  

## General Notes

Tables are imported using I, Voyager's [Table Importer plugin](https://github.com/ivoyager/ivoyager_table_importer/tree/master). For formatting info, go [here](https://github.com/ivoyager/ivoyager_table_importer/blob/master/README.md#general-file-format-and-table-editing).

As of 2024, most table data is generated by AI queries using mostly Clausd-3-Opus ("Opus"). Useful chat responses are in [tables/README_AI_CHAT.md](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md). Links are sometimes provided for data verification. 

Suggested fixes with references are welcome!

*The simulation starts in **2010**!* We'll run the sim for 15+ years to have actual game start at or after 2025. This will fill our simulation history (graphs, last-four-quarters financials, etc.). It will also help us tune our simulation parameters to roughly approximate more contemporary data and projections.

Incomplete list of abstrations/simplifications:

* ESA is treated as a space agency of the EU. "EU" in all places here really means EU + UK.
* "CNSA" is a conflation of CNSA and CASC; NASA is in some places conflated with its contractors; etc.
* We use resource groupings "Industrial Metals", "Xenon/Krypton", etc. Substances of unique importance in the simulation are singular.
* Ores always have exactly the benchmark grade. E.g., Iron ores are 70% iron; aluminium ores are 20% aluminium; precious metal ores are 0.01% precious metals, etc. We assume benification occurs at the mine to produce exactly consistent "ore" commodities. Also, all iron, aluminium, precious metals, etc., in a Body is assumed to be in ore.
* With some exceptions: all fuels combustion is used to generate electricity, and all energy input for operations is in the form of electricity. (Reality should approach this simplification over time.) Exceptions include operations like BASIC_OXYGEN_STEELMAKING_COMBUSTION where combustion inputs and outputs are listed explicitely. (TODO: We might also add a TRANSPORTATION_SECTOR under services that burns oil & refined fuels.)

Other game mechanic notes:

* We do have conservation of mass, roughly speaking, but it is achieved statistically. For example, we don't remove 0.000001% of iron ore from a strata for some interval of extraction. Instead, for the given interval we would have a 0.00001 probability to remove 0.1% from that strata. (Just giving a mechanic example, increments may differ.)

## achievements.tsv

_Not yet implemented._

I've added a few to give a basic idea of where we're going. The main achievements involve whole solar system metrics: Population, Economy, Energy (i.e., the Kardashev scale), Manufacturing, Constructions, Computation, Information, Bioproduction, Biomass and Biodiversity. We'll have other achievements that involve single player metrics or playing in more "divergent" ways: e.g., conquest, building static monuments, becoming an all-machine civ, creating the AGI that kills everyone, preserving planets or moons as undeveloped parks, and so on. (These are aspirational but give an idea where I want to stretch the game mechanics.)

## advancements.tsv

_Not yet implemented._

The table is here to help me develop a conceptual framework for the science/tech system. Here are ideas I'm working with:

* I'm avoiding the standard "tech tree" a la Civilization. Instead we will have many ongoing research & development areas like "Information Theory", "Cryptography", "Condensed Matter", "Fusion Power", "Reusable Rockets", and so on. These will range from pure theory to technology to applied engineering. In most cases these areas are never "finished" but just keep advancing.
* The general progression is theory -> technology -> engineering. E.g., "Reusable Rockets" depends on existing technology and even older theory. However, sometimes application drives new theory: a historical example is steam engines leading to advancements in thermodynamics. Similarly, I suspect that large language models and other new AI applications will drive new theories about information or cognition.
* The theory-technology-engineering spectrum corresponds (very loosely!) to public versus private funding and also "open source" versus "closed source" (i.e., proprietary) knowledge. There is a sort of knowledge diffusion between entities (nations, space agencies, space companies) that happens quickly on the theory side and more slowly on the engineering side.
* There will be an element of randomness so that progression will be less than totally predictable. E.g., your researchers keep telling you that "String Theory" someday will lead to new physics, but you just can't know. (But... the math!)
* Inspirations:
   * "Map of ..." videos by [Domain of Science](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLOYRlicwLG3St5aEm02ncj-sPDJwmojIS). 

## asset_adjustments_mod.tsv

Specifies adjustments to imported assets, e.g., model scaling. This is a "mod" table that modifies ivoyager_core/data/solar_system/asset_adjustments.tsv.

## carrying_capacity_groups.tsv

Enumeration table that defines different population groups for carrying capacity.

## compositions.tsv

Compositions define all of the extractable resources in solar system bodies. Internally, 'Composition' is a data structure attached to a Body that defines resources for one 'stratum'. Strata correspond to both physical/geophysical structures and also practictical accessibility (on Earth this includes political boundaries). 

Composition names are constructed:
`COMPOSITION_<body_name or generic body_class>_<stratum_name>[_<owner_name>]`

Field comments:
* `outer_depth` (default = 0.0) Top of the stratum relative to Body.m_radius. Negative if stratum radius is greater than m_radius (e.g., Earth's atmosphere). 
* `thickness` If blank, the stratum is assumed to include the body center and value is calculated as m_radius minus outer_depth.
* `spherical_fraction` 1 if whole sphere, < 1 if partial (i.e., region). Can be blank only if `area` is provided.
* `area` Surface area of the stratum, or leave blank to be calcuated from radius and `spherical_fraction`.
* `density` Used to calculate total mass after volume calculations. An error is applied from survey.tsv/density_error. 
* `#volume`, `#mass` Commented columns not read; here for QA on internal calculated values.
* `survey` One of survey.tsv items, which will set mass_error and other details.

Notes on `survey` levels: At game start only Earth has actual resource surveys. Other body strata have values such as spectral, explored or theory (none of which provide known "deposits" above the extimated mass fraction). For Earth, we have territorial surface surveys at level 5-6, subsurface at 4-5, deep at 2-3 and ultra deep at 1. The higher survey values are given to USA, EU and Japan, lower to Russia, China, India and Other. Knowledge of deposits is assumed to be pretty good for subsurface and even deeper strata, even if this is based on mostly surface analysis. (I believe this is a realistic abstraction.)

#### COMPOSITION_PLANET_EARTH_STRATUM_ATMOSPHERE

Mass 5.15e18 kg. 3/4 mass under 11 km. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atmosphere_of_Earth.  
Surface area of Earth: 5.10e8 km\^2.  
We arbitrarily set thickness to include mesosphere at 82 km, then calculate:  
Volume 5.10e8 km\^2 x 82 km = 4.18e10 km\^3  
Density 5.15e18 kg / (4.18e10 km\^3 x 1e9 km\^3/m\^3)  
   =0.123 kg/m\^3 = 1.23e-4 g/cm\^3

#### COMPOSITION_PLANET_EARTH_STRATUM_OCEAN

Mass of hydrosphere 1.386e18 t, of which 97.5% (=1.351e18 t) is ocean. Area is 3.61e8 km^2. Density of seawater 1020 to >1050 kg/m^3 (=1.02 to >1.05 g/cm^3).   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hydrosphere   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seawater   
We use 1.03 g/cm^3 density. We calculate average depth:   
1.351e21 kg / (1030 kg/m^3 * 1e9 m^3/km^3 * 3.61e8 km^2) = 3.633 km   
Volume 3.61e8 km^2 * 3.633 km = 1.31e9 km^3   
Content:   
We consider 3.5% salt as "Industrial Minerals".   
Disolved gasses: (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ocean)   
Carbon dioxide: 14 mL/kg; x1.977 kg/m3 / (1e6  mL/m3) -> 2.8e-3%   
Nitrogen: 9 mL/kg; x1.25 kg/m3 / (1e6  mL/m3) -> 1.1e-3%   
Oxygen: 5 mL/kg; x1.429 kg/m3 / (1e6  mL/m3  -> 7.1e-4%   

96.5% Water   
3.5 Industrial Minerals (salt)   

#### COMPOSITION_PLANET_EARTH_STRATUM_OCEAN_FLOOR

Arbitrarily set at 100m depth for mining potential (aka Hoover it up!):   
https://oceanminingintel.com/insights/ocean-mining-the-5-minute-what-why-where-how-and-who

#### COMPOSITION_PLANET_EARTH_STRATUM_\<crust and deeper layers>

Layers arbitrarily defined for extraction potential, considering deepest:   
- pit mining: 1.2 km, but usually < 1 km.
- mining: ~4 km. Gets really tough below (but will be possible with future engineering).
- drilling: ~12 km, but >9 is rare.

So we have strata for player exploitation as:
 - CONT_SURFACE, 0 - 1 km: pit mining (this is really -0.8 to 0.2 to ref sea level))
 - CONT_SUBSURF, 1 - 5 km: subsurface mining
 - CONT_DEEP, 5 - 9 km: deep drilling; possibly mining with future advances

And deeper strata not accessible at game start:
 - CONT_ULTRA_DEEP: 9 - 19 km
 - CONT_EXTREME_DEEP: 19 - 29 km
 - CONT_LOWER_CRUST: 29 - 40 km (can we get here without whole planet harvesting?)

(Average continental elivation is 800m, so table 'outer_depth' values are always -0.8 from above numbers.)
 
Our simplified Earth structure model (outer depth, +thickness; in km):
* Ocean: 0; +3.5
* Ocean Floor: 3.5; +0.1 (assuming future exploitation by Hoover-it-up methods)
* Ocean Crust: 3.6; +7.5 (real world 5-10 km)
* Continental surface: -0.8; +1
* Continental subsurface: 0.2; +4
* Continental deep: 4.2; +4
* Continental ultra deep: 8.2; +10
* Continental extreme deep: 18.2; +10
* Continental lower crust: 28.2; +11.8
* Mantle: 40; +2850
* Core: 2890; to center

Notes on upper/lower continental crust: There is a Conrad
discontinuity at 15-20 km and "sima starts about 11 km below the Conrad
discontinuity". The sial/sima transition is all about chemistry and
density, so that is where we want the upper/lower transition.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth%27s_crust   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continental_crust   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structure_of_Earth   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sial   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sima_(geology)   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structure_of_Earth#/media/File:RadialDensityPREM.jpg   

Unowned part of continental surface is Antarctica (area 1.42e7 km^2). Subract
Antarctica and 6 major players from total land area (1.49e8 km^2) gets us area
of PLAYER_OTHER at 9.03e7 km^2.

#### COMPOSITION_MOON_MOON_xxxx

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Moon-Geology).

## compositions_resources_deposits.tsv

Percent values. "Deposit" is a fictional concept that can be thought of as something related to strip ratio for surface mining. It is the value that determines extraction efficiency. Specifically, any extraction operation (in operations.tsv) uses the specified energy but extracts at rate = t/h x deposits fraction. 

This table is for dev convenience. Internally, deposit is calculated from mass fraction, survey level, and variance. Mass fraction is determined by compositions_resources_proportions.tsv. We use deposit level from this table to calculate a minumum variance assuming a minimum survey level of 5 (which is a really good knowledge level), overriding any value supplied in compositions_resources_variances.tsv if the result is larger.

Deposits are roughly tuned to typical strip ratios ([AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Mining-Energies-and-Strip-Ratios)). A deposits level at the high end will allow extraction at the low end of the energy range:
* Coal 3:1 to 10:1 -> 25-9% deposits (0.43 kWh/t at 25%, accounting for 100/70 grade conversion)
* Iron 0.5:1 to 3:1 -> 67-25% deposits (0.62 kWh/t at 67%, accounting for 70/45 grade conversion)
* Aluminum 0.5:1 to 2:1 -> 67-33% deposits (61 kWh/t at 67%, accounting for 30/45 grade conversion, /.52 mw)
* Industrial Metals 5:1 to 30:1 -> 17-3% deposits (Zn: 0.2 kWh/t at 17%, 5/5 grade)
* Precious Metals 10:1 to 100:1 -> 9-1% deposits (Au: 15000 kWh/t at 9%, 1e-4/1e-6 grade conversion)
* Uranium 10:1 to 1000:1 -> 9-0.1% deposits (30 kWh/t at 25%, 1/0.1 grade conversion)
* Rare Eaths 10:1 to 1000:1 -> 9-0.1% deposits (30 kWh/t at 1/1 grade)

The concept is more abstract for others, but still relates to availability. Target deposits:
* Oil 5-0.05% deposits, ~ "primary" to "tertiary" (3 kWh/t at 5%)
* Methane 5-0.5% deposits, ~ "conventional" to "unconventional" (3 kWh/t at 5%)
* Water 100% deposits, surface fresh water for the taking (0.01 kWh/t at 100% ???) Note: To do water properly, we would need to add a separate "fresh water" strata, since that total mass is tiny compared to H2O locked up in the surface regolith (except for Antarctica). However, I'm simplifying since this is Earth-only.

## compositions_resources_proportions.tsv

Defines mass proportion for all extractable resources in each composition. Each row is summed and normalized internally, so we supply percent for convenience but numbers don't have to add to _exactly_ 100. For solid non-core strata, we generally calculate percent for each item and use regolith to add to 100. For Earth's 'surface' strata, numbers add to 100 without water, then we add water value to represent surface and aquifer fresh water.

We define benchmark ores with these grades (see justifications under resources.tsv): 70% iron, 30% aluminium, 5% industrial metals, 0.01% precious metals, 1% rare earths and 1% uranium. These ore grades are used to convert percent pure resource content to percent ore, assuming that 100% of the target resource is contained in ore. Where we have a range, we use the mid-point or log-mean (e.g., 0.001-0.0001 -> 0.003). Cores of the Moon and similar or larger bodies don't have ores but have native metals (mostly iron) and some 'industrial minerals' (representing sulfer and anything else). For S- and M-type asteroids, we split the metals content between ore and native (50:50 for S and 5:95 for M; for iron, 'industrial' and 'precious').

Percent abundances from AI chats:

[Metals](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Metal-Abundances) (metal % -> ore %, where appropriate)  
[Volatiles](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Volatiles)  
[Moon Water and Helium-3](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Moon-Geology)  
[Earth Fossil Fuels](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Kerogen-and-Fossil-Fuels-Deposits)  
[Earth Fresh Water](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Earth-Fresh-Water)  
[Industrial Minerals](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Industrial-Minerals-Mining) (summed Earth crust minerals, less silicates; others are made up)  

Notes:
* Percents are converted internally to mass and adjusted using 'error' assuming a log-normal distribution. The adjustment bias is kept and re-applied to interface values shown to GUI and AI. Hence, the table values are really the 'public estimates' and not the true values for each body.
* We drop volatiles in some strata for simplification. Water is set to 0.5% for Earth surface, which is vastly more than than available fresh water but vastly less than actual water locked up in the regolith. (Un-simplifying this would require a separate "fresh water" stratum.)

## compositions_resources_variances.tsv

'Mixed' strata such as atmosphere are omitted from table and have default variance = 0.0.

Any value specified here is overriden by calculated value

Variance is the spatial heterogeneity of resource mass in each composition (as a coefficient of variation). High variance together with high survey level causes "deposits" which are useful for mining. E.g., USA and Japan have similar total metal content in their upper crust. But variance is boosted for USA to provide better extraction/energy ratio for mining operations. Variance goes down with mass as a resource is extracted (because you're removing the long tail of the log-normal distribution).



For undifferentiated asteroids and small moons, spatial heterogeneity is much much smaller. However, the minumum "deposits" level is always the mass proportion of the material. So here the purpose of surveys is to find the asteroid with unusually high abundance (which is a function of error).

## facilities.tsv

Name construction: `FACILITY_<body_name>_<player_name>`

There is at most one "facility" for each player at each body, which combines all of that player's activity. 

The table has game start only. We have one "homeworld" facility for each player on Earth, plus four at SPACECRAFT_ISS (one each for NASA, Roscosmos, ESA & JAXA) and one at SPACECRAFT_TIANGONG (CNSA).

#### public_portion
Fraction of facility that is public sector. For small facilities, generally 1.0 for space agencies and 0.0 for private companies. For Earth "homeworld" facilities representing polities, values follow roughly: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_public_sector_size:


|             | 2010 (%)       | 2020 (%)       |
| ----------- | -------------- | -------------- |
| USA         | 13.3           | 13.3           |
| Russia      | 40.6           | 40.6           |
| China       | 30 (guess)     | 25             |
| EU          | 18 (see below) | 18 (see below) |
| India       | 3.8            | 3.8            |
| Japan       | 7.7            | 7.7            |
| Other       | 20 (guess)     | 20 (guess)     |


We mainly use ILO estimates, or best guess what it would be in ~2010 and ~2020. EU is set between Germany (12.9) & France (20.5), leaning to the latter. 

#### internal_market

If set, internal operations are treated as separate entities for taxation and economic activity measurement. I.e., all resources produced & used are sales & purchases. True for "ports" and larger facilities, false for smaller facilities. We assume the ISS's solar panels produce ecectricty for its own operation, while "USA" solar panels produce electricity sold to other domestic entities.

#### solar_occlusion

Overrides Body.solar_occlusion if specified. These are set to give observed (or guessed) solar power utilizations (="capacity factor") for polity "homeworld facilities". See facilities_operations_utilizations.tsv/SOLAR_POWER below.


## facilities_inventories.tsv

Quantities added to facility inventory reserves at simulator start. Table values in trade_units, but converted to internal.

For now, just giving everyone something for dev...


## facilities_operations_capacities.tsv

See [operations.tsv](#operationstsv) for definitions of "1 operation unit".

Capacity is "peak", "nominal", "nameplate" or similar. Utilization is "capacity factor" (for energy generation) or similar.  
See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capacity_factor. For our internal calculation purposes, capacity x utilization = run_rate. For extractions, the extraction rate for each output resource is multiplied by the deposits fraction.

Note: These tables are here for development convenience. Capacities are actually determined by modules. However, game start code will set appropriate module number in each game start facility to achieve capacities defined in the _capacities.tsv table.

#### Renewables

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Solar-and-other-renewable-energy-generation).

Table data is 2010 installed capacity values converted to MW. Utilization (=capacity factor or efficiency) will likely be constant in the simularion so using either 2020 or projected 2030 values or some plausible compromise. Using 0.75 for all geothermal.

World GWp at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solar_power.  
See also https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solar_power_by_country.  

Above more or less agrees with installed capacity from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind_power_by_country.

For reference, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capacity_factor lists values for:  
* USA: ~32-37%, average ~34%
* UK onshore: ~27-33%, average ~30%
* UK offshore: ~26-41%, average ~35%
(But continental Europe is less than UK, I believe...)




#### ISS & Tiangong

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#ISS-and-Tiangong).

Using contemporary or anticipated values at sim start, rather than 2010.

For simplification, we're using 50% capacity factor for solar panels at 1 AU that are shaded 50% of the time.

Per https://www.nasa.gov/feature/facts-and-figures, ISS solar power is 75-90 kw. This is USOS segment and (I assume) actual generation, so roughly consistent with above.

## facilities_operations_capacity_factors.tsv

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Solar-and-other-renewable-energy-generation).

This table is only used for renewables. It sets the fixed capacity factor for each renewable operation at each game start facility.

## facilities_operations_extractions.tsv

This table sets game start capacity to achieve specified effective rate for extraction operations considering target resource deposits. Capacity calculated from this value will override any value set in facilities_operations_capacities.tsv. E.g., if we want effective oil extraction at 200 and oil deposit is 1%, then we need capacity 20000. We can just set 200 here and capacity will be set correctly even if we change table deposit level later. 

We use regional production values from [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Oil-and-Gas-Production) and split these roughly 37% surface, 57% subsurface, 6% deep, adjusted for region (e.g., biased deeper in USA and Europe).

FIXME?: It's likely that real world capacities are greater than production. Ignoring that for now.

2010 oil production:

| Region   | 2010 total | Surface | Subsurface | Deep |
|----------|------------|---------|------------|------|
| USA      | 206        | 20      | 160        | 26   |
| Russia   | 377        | 160     | 200        | 17   |
| China    | 150        | 70      | 75         | 5    |
| EU+UK    | 120        | 12      | 80         | 28   |
| India    | 26         | 16      | 9.5        | 0.5  |
| Japan    | 3.7        | 1       | 1.7        | 1    |
| Other    | 689        | 255     | 392        | 42   |

2010 gas production:

| Region   | 2010 total | Surface | Subsurface | Deep |
|----------|------------|---------|------------|------|
| USA      | 1117       | 108     | 867        | 141  |
| Russia   | 1081       | 459     | 574        | 49   |
| China    | 54         | 25      | 27         | 1.8  |
| EU+UK    | 258        | 26      | 172        | 60   |
| India    | 50         | 29      | 20         | 1    |
| Japan    | 43         | 12      | 20         | 11   |
| Other    | 788        | 291     | 447        | 48   |

## facilities_populations.tsv

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#World-population-and-agency-employees).

Other sources:  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_population_in_2010  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demographics_of_the_European_Union

"Population" of space agency players on Earth is employees.
I think Haiku response might be combining CNSA and CASC (but that's ok).  
NASA actual numbers for fy 2010, 2020: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NASA#cite_note-3

## major_strata.tsv

Enumeration table for names of physical strata that may occur in any body.

## mod_classes.tsv

_Not yet implemented._

Enumeration table for module classes.

## modules.tsv

_Not yet implemented._ (Operation capacity is currently added directly without Modules.)

Modules usually represent real physical components (e.g., a nuclear plant) and
(mostly) have integral quantities. But we can have different modules that allow
the same Operation in different contexts, each with its own 'op_quantity'. So,
for example, we can have small portable nuclear reactors appropriate for small
space facilities. (But some of this gets a little weird with service economy
and intangible resources.)

See "operation unit" as defined for different op classes (above).



For power generators, 1 module -> 1 GJ/d at 100% capacity. For most others,
1 module -> 1 t/d of mass converted at 100% capacity.


FIXME: Changed power from GJ/d -> MW

MODULE_SOLAR_ARRAYS
Surface power density (SPD) 6.63 W/m^2 on Earth;
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_power_density
1 m^2/6.63e-6 MW x 1 MWh/3.6 GJ x 1d/24h -> 1746 m^2 for 1 GJ/d on Earth.
This is obviously different in space depending on distance to sun and orbit
body blocking. We set 'area' at 1/4 this amount for the general case of space,
full-sun at 1 AU.

MODULE_COMBUSTION_GENERATORS
SPD = solar x 6.63/482 -> 24 m^2

MODULE_FISSION_REACTORS
SPD = solar x 6.63/241 -> 48 m^2

MODULE_DT_FUSION_REACTORS
ooma same as fission

MODULE_DD_FUSION_REACTORS
ooma same as fission

MODULE_DHe3_FUSION_REACTORS
ooma same as fission

MODULE_He3He3_FUSION_REACTORS
ooma same as fission

MODULE_MINES
MODULE_AIR_CONDENSERS
MODULE_FARMS
MODULE_WATER_ELECTROLYZERS
MODULE_GASSIFIERS
MODULE_GAS_CONVERTERS
MODULE_REFINERIES
MODULE_FERMENTERS
MODULE_ISOTOPE_SEPARATORS
MODULE_SMELTERS
MODULE_CEMENT_KILNS
MODULE_GLASS_KILNS
MODULE_RECYCLING_PLANTS
MODULE_CHIP_FABRICATORS
MODULE_FACTORIES
MODULE_CHEMICAL_PLANTS
MODULE_PHARMACEUTICAL_PLANTS
MODULE_SERVER_CLUSTERS
MODULE_URBAN_SURFACE
MODULE_CREW_FACILITIES
MODULE_HABITATS
MODULE_LAUNCH_FACILITIES




## moons_mod.tsv

Modifies ivoyager/data/solar_system/moons.tsv.

## op_classes.tsv

Op classes define GUI tab groups for operations: Energy, Extraction, Refining, etc. Only used for GUI.

## op_groups.tsv

Op groups define operation subgrouping within a class. Only used for GUI.

## operations.tsv

Operations define most of the things that happen at Facilities: power generation, resource extraction, etc. Operations are allowed by Modules.
 
Internally in the 'Operations' object we have arrays 'capacities' and 'rates'. We are at 100% utilization when rate == capacity. 

One "operation unit" corresponds to quantities in the operations.tsv row. In general, rate = 1.0 means:

    ENERGY        - 1 MW electrical output (ie, MWe)
    EXTRACTION    - 1 t/h extracted material*
    REFINING      - 1 t/h total mass conversion
    MANUFACTURING - 1 t/h total production
    BIOME         - ??? 1 km^2 equivilant Earth area
    SERVICES      - Varies; often 1 unit/h of some intangible resource

    * For differentiated solids, output is multiplied by a 'deposits' fraction (shown
      in GUI as 0 - 100%). Deposits is a function of mass fraction, resource variance
      and a 'survey factor'.


Use of 1 t/h is convenient for operation energy/electricity data, as that is often obtained in untis "MWh per tonne". So, e.g., 1.4 MWh per tonne extraction converts to 1.4 MW in the `electricity` field and one tonne in the `output_quantities` field.

Fields:
* `op_class`, `op_group`, `module_class` and `stratum` refer to entities from the corresponding tables.
* `sub_label` is for GUI dispaly within an op_group.
* `process_group` is an internal enum used in the process code. (Leave blank to safely disable.)
* `electricity` is in most cases all of the output or input energy (+ or -, respectively). See General Notes, simplifications.
* `dev_xxxx` fields correspond to total values that contribute to the major dev metrics: Energy, Manufacturing, Computation and Bioproduction.
* `input_resources`, `input_quantities`, `output_resources` and `output_quantities` refer to all of the resources (other than Electricity) that are used or generated. Quantities are specified in resource `trade_unit` (see [resources.tsv](#resourcestsv)) _per hour_.

Notes:
* Extractable resources in differentiated solids (which have variance > 0.0) are assumed to have a log-normal abundance distribution. In most cases, it's only the upper tail of that distribution that is economically accessible for extraction. We use a formula that combines abundance, variance, and a 'survey factor' to obtain a 'deposits' fraction (expressed as 0 - 100% in GUI). The deposits fraction determines extraction efficiency, which is the total extracted resource divided by input energy. Ongoing extraction reduces both abundance and variance, reducing deposits much faster than reducing abundance alone. This can be countered, albeit with diminishing returns, by increasing 'survey factor'. In most cases, the economical usefulness of a resource will be exhausted long before the resource abundance reaches zero.

#### OPERATION_SOLAR_POWER, _WIND_POWER, _TIDAL_POWER, _HYDROPOWER, _GEOTHERMAL_POWER

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Solar-and-other-renewable-energy-generation).

Rate unit is 1 MW by definition. Utilization is subject to the environment.  
See comments in [facilities_operations_xxxx.tsv](#facilities_operations_xxxxtsv).  
For solar, utilization is a function of disance from sun and `solar_occlusion` (from bodies.tsv or override value from facilities.tsv).   
For other renewables, table value in facilities_operations_utilizations.tsv never changes.

#### OPERATION_COAL_POWER
Combustion  
Typical "bituminous" coal: 84.4% C, 5.4% H2, 6.7% O2, 1.8% S, 1.7% N2;   
Energy density 24 MJ/kg, for 40% efficiency, "325 kg will power 100 W for yr";   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coal   
0.325t/100Wyr x 1yr/365.25d x 10^6W/MW x 1MWd/86.4GJ -> 103 t coal/1000 GJ   
Combustion:   
(84% C) C + O2 -> CO2; mws 12.011 + 31.998 -> 44.009   
(5.4% H2) 2 H2 + O2 -> 2 H2O; mws 4.032 + 31.998 -> 36.03   
(1.8% S) S + O2 -> SO2; mws 32.06 + 31.998 -> 64.058   
(1.7% N2) N2 -> N2 (ignoring NOx)   
(6.7% O2) Assume cobusted so deduct from O2 input   
Per 103 t coal,   
86.5 C (in coal) + 230.5 O2 -> 317 CO2   
5.56 H2 (in coal) + 44.1 O2 -> 49.7 H2O   
1.85 S (in coal) + 1.85 O2 -> 3.70 SO2   
6.90 O2 (in coal) - 6.90 O2 -> nothing   
	-> + 1000 GJ power   
t per 1000 GJ: 103 coal + 269 O2 -> 317 CO2 + 49.7 H2O + 3.70 SO2 + 1.75 N2   
We could balance mass with 'ash' product if we want to go there.   
This is close to wiki CO2 emmisions data: 1001 g CO2/kWh;   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electricity_generation   
1001g/kWh x 10^-6t/g x 1e6kWh/3600 GJ -> 278 t CO2/1000 GJ   

#### OPERATION_OIL_POWER
Combustion  
We're simplifying and burning oil directly rather than processing to fuel oil.   
84% C, 12% H2, 3% S, 1% O2, 1% N2   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Petroleum   
Specific energy ~42 versus ~30 of Coal (1.4x)   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_density   
Ajusting totals from Coal (in t),   
t per 1000 GJ: 73.6 oil + 197 O2 -> 226 CO2 + 78.9 H2O + 1.47 SO2 + 0.735 N2   
(Assuming 40% efficiency. Is this ok?)   

#### OPERATION_REFINED_FUELS_POWER
Combustion  
Specific energy gasoline 46.4, kerosene 43 MJ/kg;   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_density   
For octane, 1kg C8H18 + 3.51kg O2 -> 3.09kg CO2 + 1.42kg H20   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gasoline   
If we use S.E. 44 MJ/kg, we have (in t):   
t per 1000 GJ: 70.3 fuel + 247 O2 -> 217 CO2 + 99.8 H20   
(Assuming 40% efficiency. Is this ok?)   

#### OPERATION_ETHANOL_POWER
Combustion  
Specific energy 30 MJ/kg HHV   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_density   
C2H5OH + 3 O2 -> 2 CO2 + 3 H2O; mws 46.069 + 95.994 -> 88.018 + 54.045   
t per 1000 GJ: 103 ethanol + 214 O2 -> 197 CO2 + 121 H2O   
(Assuming 40% efficiency. Is this ok?)   

#### OPERATION_METHANE_POWER
Combustion  
Specific energy 55.6 MJ/kg HHV (natural gas 53.6)   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_density   
CH4 + 2 O2 -> CO2 + 2 H2O; mws 16.043 + 63.996 -> 44.009 + 36.03   
t per 1000 GJ: 55.6 methane + 222 O2 -> 153 CO2 + 125 H2O   
This is close to wiki CO2 emmisions data: natural gas 669 g CO2/kWh,   
-> 186 t CO2/1000 GJ   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electricity_generation   

#### OPERATION_HYDROGEN_POWER
aka, fuel cells   
Specific energy 141.86 MJ/kg HHV   
2 H2 + O2 -> 2 H2O; mws 4.032 + 31.998 -> 36.03   
t per 1000 GJ: 21.8 H2 + 173 O2 -> 195 H2O   

#### OPERATION_FISSION_POWER
Our proxy "fission fuel" is yellowcake.   
Total yellowcake volume for 2020 was 92 million lb;   
https://www.yellowcakeplc.com/uranium-market/   
Total nuclear power supplied in 2019 was 2,586 TWh   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nuclear_power   
96e6 lbs/2586 TWh x 1 TWh/3.6e6 GJ x 1kg/2.20462 lbs -> 0.00468 kg/GJ   
-> 4.68 kg / 1000 GJ   
Assume 90% used for power, so 5.20 kg yellowcake / 1000 GJ power.   

#### **** Drilling and Mining Notes ****
* `_SURFACE_` 0-1 km (this covers "pit" or "surface" in the case of mining)
* `_SUBSURFACE_` 1-5 km (this covers modern subsurface mining and most drilling)
* `_DEEP_` 5-9 km (drilling only using contemporary engineering)
* We don't bother with onshore versus offshore drilling. Offshore drilling occurs on the continental plate, near enough for our purposes to lump with continental drilling.

#### OPERATION_OIL_xxxx_DRILLING

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Oil-and-Gas-Energy-Input).

AI value 0.499 MWh per tonne of oil is from US 2009 study, which probably represents conventional oil extraction.  
Adjust for sim USA deposits (x 0.5%) -> 0.00250 MWh/t for 100% deposits. Use x2 for subsurface and x4 for deep.

-> surface 0.00250, subsurface 0.00500, deep 0.01000.

Output is 100% Oil.

#### OPERATION_GAS_xxxx_DRILLING

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Oil-and-Gas-Energy-Input).

AI value 0.352 MWh per tonne of gas is from US 2011 study, which probably represents conventional gas extraction.  
Adjust for sim USA deposits (x 2%) -> 0.00704 MWh/t for 100% deposits. Use x2 for subsurface and x4 for deep.

-> surface 0.00704, subsurface 0.01408, deep 0.02816.

We simplify and output separated products from drilling: 90% Methane, 9.975% Ethane and 0.025% Helium.

#### OPERATION_COAL_xxxx_MINING

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Coal-Mining).

We use the smaller energy values from the 2020 China figures (1.40 MWh per tonne surface, 2.90 MWh per tonne subsurface) for the case where we have 80% deposits. Larger values cited in the 2010 USDE would be simulated by deposits on the order of 50%. (Note: use these deposits to tune Earth territorial Compositions.) Assume 82% recovery ratio.

x 0.8 x 0.82 -> 0.92 MW near-surface, 1.9 MW subsurface.

Output is 0.82 t/h coal (recovery ratio) and 0.18 t/h gravel/conglomerate.

Per US 2000 study https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2013/11/f4/mining_bandwidth.pdf,

Coal Recovery ratio: 82%  
Coal Btu/Ton mined: 370,628  
Per t mined:  
370,628 Btu/Ton x 1060 MJ/1e6 Btu x 1 ton/0.907 t -> 433 MJ/t  

(I think this is per ton of extracted material, but still >10x different than Opus. Need to investigate!)

#### OPERATION_URANIUM_xxxx_MINING

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Uranium-Mining).

We make a huge simplification here by ignoring in-sutu leaching and assuming all mining is for uranium ore. This let's us skip yellowcake as an intermediate commodity. However, it makes the energy cost of extraction higher than reality.

Parlty to compensate for above, we use a high value of 1% Uranium Fuel (=UO2) content in Uranium Ore (see resources.tsv), and the lower energy values for ore extraction, 25 MWh/t open pit (= near-surface) and 90 MWh/t underground (= subsurface), for the case of 20% deposits. Assume 82% recovery ratio.

x 0.2 x 0.82 -> 4.1 MW near-surface, 14.8 MW subsurface.

Output is 0.82 t/h Uranium Ore and 0.18 t/h Gravel/Conglomerate.

#### OPERATION_IRON_xxxx_MINING

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Industrial-Metals-Mining).

Assuming 50% "deposits".



#### OPERATION_ALUMINIUM_xxxx_MINING

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Industrial-Metals-Mining).


#### OPERATION_INDUST_METALS_xxxx_MINING

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Industrial-Metals-Mining).

#### OPERATION_PRECIOUS_METALS_xxxx_MINING



_Old research below..._

Source for energy/t for gold, copper, nickle, iron (download pdf report): https://www.ceecthefuture.org/resources/mining-energy-consumption-2021.

* Iron magnetite: 0.3 GJ/t ore(!); 41% mining, 43% comminution, 16% other processing
* Iron hematite: 0.15 GJ/t ore(!); 90% mining, 10% processing
* Copper: 24 GJ/t final copper (average); 60% mining, 36% comminution (grinding/milling), 4% other processing (smelting???)
* Nickel (leach): 244 GJ/t final nickle (average); 59% mining, 29% comminution, 12% other processing
* Lithium: 15 GJ/t hydroxide (I think); 48% mining, 47% comminution, 5% other processing
* Gold (underground, higher grade): 130,000 GJ/t unrefined gold bars; 45% mining, 26% comminution, 29% other processing

The reason for the 6-orders-of-magnitude differences above is due mainly to differences in ore deposits. Rougly speaking, 500,000x more mining/comminution is needed to get a tonne of gold ore versus a tonne of iron ore. We simulate that by having extraction rate multiplied by "known deposits" level, with Earth deposits: ~33% (iron), 0.033% (indust metal), 1e-4% (precious metals).

Note: We tweeked compositions to give above deposits. If this gives us wrong total masses, we can re-adjust compositions and tweek energies here.

For all but iron, "other processing" is smelting (converting ore to metal). We use average of the two iron ores, and use nickle and gold as our proxies for industrical and precious metals.
  
1 MWh = 3.6 GJ.   
1 GJ/t at 1 t/d, x 1/3.6 MWh/GJ x 1/24 d/h = 1.157e-2 MW   
For ops power, multiply above by the ore's power consumption (above) and the ore's typical Earth deposits fraction (from Compositions values).   

For iron mining (1 t/d ore extraction):   
0.22 GJ/t x 0.33 -> 8.49e-4 MW   

For industrial metals mining (using 88% of Nickel power above):   
215 GJ/t -> 0.828 MW   

For precious metal ores (using 71% of Gold power above, x 1000 kg/t):   
102,700 GJ/t -> 396 MW   




#### OPERATION_URBAN_DEVELOPED
Allows 20000 humans / km^2, which is about the density of Paris proper:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_cities_proper_by_population_density
In 2010 & 2020, 51% & 56% of humans were "urban":
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_population

For game start facility values, we assume urban capacity is 2x its present
inhabitants (which is ~50% of total population).
'rate' is n/a for this operation.
TODO: Mechanism to grow urban capacity.

#### OPERATION_SMALL_FOOD_FARMING
Allows 100 humans / km^2. Capacity is ~1x total population.
All private sector (is this way off for Russia, China?).




## planets_mod.tsv

Modifies ivoyager/data/solar_system/planets.tsv.


## players.tsv

Game start only.

## populations.tsv

Different kinds of humans or non-humans, corporeal or virtual, that we want to count in total Population. Mostly sentient but for game flavor we also have sub-sentient androids.

## processes.tsv

_TODO_

Processes are very similar to operations, but do not directly involve modules. These handle non-operation changes in body compositions or characteristics, such as restoration of the fresh water hydrosphere and climate change in response to atmospheric changes.


## resource_classes.tsv

Categories for GUI sub-subpanel tabs in the Markets subpanel: Energy, Ores, Volatiles, etc.

## resources.tsv

Fields:
* `resource_class` See associated table.
* `trade_class` Internal enum that affects physical transport mechanics.
* `trade_unit` is the quantity for `start_price` and related GUI items (price, bid, ask), and sets the minimum quantity in internal trade mechanics.   
* `start_price` Rough Earth values in 2010 for sim start.
* `mass_err_mult` Mulitiplyer for surveys.tsv/`mass_error`.

#### ELECTRICITY
Cannot be transported, but traded w/in a Body. Special storage.
LCOE on the order of $60/MWh (6 cents/kWh), say $100/MWh wholesale,
x 1 MWh/3.6 GJ -> $27.8/GJ
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cost_of_electricity_by_source

#### COAL
$189/t; 2/22

#### OIL
$70/barrel oil x 7.33 barrels/t = $513/t

#### REFINED_FUELS
$3.57/gallon for kerosine -> or $1180/t

#### ETHANOL
$849/t; 2/22 chemanalyst.com

#### METHANE
$4/MMBtu, ~$4/1000ft3, ~$4/GJ x 0.049 GJ/kg x 1000 kg/t = $196/t

#### HYDROGEN
$1390/t; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prices_of_chemical_elements

#### URANIUM_FUELS
Prices for uranium oxide "yellowcake" bottomed in 2001 at $7/lb and topped in
2007 at $137/lb;
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uranium_market
Found recent price $42.43/lb U3O8e (source?)
x 2.20462 lb/t -> $93.54/kg

#### HELIUM3
Wiki - "historically about $100/liter" (gas?? Presure?) "59 gram per liter at 1 atm".
Assume price is at 1atm. Then, $100/59g.

#### IRON_ORES

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Industrial-Metals-Mining).

Defined as 70% Fe by weight. This is a small bump from contemporary 62%.

2010 price: $150/t x 70/62 -> $169/t.

#### ALUMINIUM_ORES

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Industrial-Metals-Mining).

Defined as 30% aluminium (primary). This is really low for bauxite (the main ore commodity on Earth) but is a significant boost from the high end of concentrations in non-sedementary ores, so perhaps a better expectation for a future space economy.

2010 price: $2500/t x 30/45 -> $1667/t.

#### INDUSTRIAL_METAL_ORES

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Industrial-Metals-Mining).

Catch-all for dozens of others besides iron & aluminium. We're using copper, nickle, zinc & lead for inspiration, although I'd guess that others are mostly lower concentrations and higher prices. These four range from 1-15% metal by content, w/ 2010 prices $800-2000/t.

Defined as 5% industrial metals by weight at 2010 price $1500/t.

#### PRECIOUS_METAL_ORES

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Precious-Metals-and-Rare-Earths-Mining).

AI lists gold ore grades at 1-20 g/t for gold and 1-10 g/t for others (excluding silver which we're calling an "industrial metal"). That's consistent with Wiki sources that list high end of Earth Au ores at 0.0001-0.0030%. We're bumping up the benchmark to 0.01% to account for "native gold", since our sim assumes all extractable precious metal is in ore. Some additional benification can be assumed at the mine to compensate for transport fuel costs.

Defined as 0.01% Precious Metals by weight (TODO: calculate ore price given pure gold 2010 price $39362/kg).

#### RARE_EARTH_ORES

See [AI Chat](https://github.com/t2civ/astropolis_sdk/blob/master/public/data/tables/README_AI_CHATS.md#Precious-Metals-and-Rare-Earths-Mining).

La, Ce & Pr ore grades range 0.1-10%, but most others 0.1-1% (Sc is much less). We take the high end of the latter range for benchmark, and boost a bit considering that as pure refined metal rather than oxide. 2010 prices go from ~$20/kg for most to $50 for Y and $5000 for Sc. 

Defined as 1% Rare Earths by weight at 2010 price $30/kg.

#### INDUSTRIAL_MINERAL_ORES

Defined as 30% Industrial Minerals by weight. (See '_IRON_ORES note on grade and
benefication.)
ooma price

#### URANIUM_ORES

Defined as 1% Fissile Fuels by weight (Earth grades range from 0.1% up to 18%,
but 1% is typical). (See '_IRON_ORES note on grade and benefication.)   
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uranium_ore   
For price assume 1% grade and 10% price of yellowcake, giving $93/t.   
TODO: fix numbers given that we abstract away yellowcake, which is an intermediate
form customarily produced at the mine (but not in our simulation).

#### INDUSTRIAL_MINERALS

ooma price

#### HELIUM3_REGOLITH

N/A Earth; no start price.

#### THOLINS

N/A Earth; no start price.

#### STONE

This represents stone in the ground or traded dimentional stone.

#### REGOLITH

Mix of low-grade gravel, sand, clay, etc.

#### WATER

Wide range of pricing; trucked values as low as $1/t.

#### OXYGEN

$154/t; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prices_of_chemical_elements

#### NITROGEN

$140/t; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prices_of_chemical_elements

#### CARBON_DIOXIDE

$182/t; chemanalyst.com

#### CARBON_MONOXIDE

$28700/t; chemanalyst.com

#### ETHANE

Couldn't find price but $600/t for methanol; chemanalyst.com

#### AMMONIA

$1000/t; chemanalyst.com

#### SULFUR_DIOXIDE

Couldn't find but $312/t for sulfur

#### HELIUM

$24,000/t; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prices_of_chemical_elements

#### ARGON_NEON

$931/t; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prices_of_chemical_elements

#### KRYPTON_XENON

Kr & Xe; Kr is cheaper (by far) at $290/kg;
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prices_of_chemical_elements

#### STEEL

$1500/t; random news article, early 2022.

#### IRON

Represent native iron (such as in planetory cores) or traded pig iron.

#### INDUSTRIAL_METALS

Represents native metals (such as in planetory cores) or traded refined metals.

Al $1790/t, Ni $13900/t, Cu $6000/t; use Cu as proxy price.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prices_of_chemical_elements

#### PRECIOUS_METALS

Represents native metals (such as in planetory cores) or traded refined metals.

Use Au as proxy at $60000/kg, 2/22.

#### RARE_EARTHS

Light REs ~$41,000/kg; Heavy REs ~$21,0000/kg
We split the difference and call it $100,000/kg.

#### CONCRETE

random source?

#### GLASSES

ooma

#### PLASTICS_POLYMERS

$1200/t for styrene; chemanalyst.com

#### SYNTHETIC_FIBERS

Random source "average cost of non- aerospace grade is around $21.5/kg"

#### INDUSTRIAL_SCRAP

Steel scrap $0.23/lb x 2204 lbs/t = $506/t; random online source.

#### SLAG

$200/t; random online slag quote

#### BULK_FOODS

Grain, etc.; source?

#### CRAFT_FOODS

$20 bag of groceries. These are "luxury" in space.

#### WOOD

ooma

#### BIOFIBERS

ooma

#### BIOFEEDSTOCK

ooma

#### SEWAGE

ooma

#### FINISHED_STRUCTURES

ooma

#### HEAVY_MACHINERY

ooma

#### ROBOTICS

ooma

#### ELECTRONICS

ooma

#### BATTERIES

Tesla car battery on the order of ~$3-4k; call it $2000/t. 

#### ADVANCED_COMPOSITES

$85/kg; aerospace cabon fiber, 2022 news article

#### FERTILIZERS

$717/t; 2022 news article.

#### INDUSTRIAL_CHEMICALS

ooma; presumably more than kerosine

#### FINE_CHEMICALS

ooma

#### PHARMACEUTICALS

ooma

#### CONSUMER_GOODS

ooma

#### LUXURY_GOODS

ooma


## spacecrafts.tsv

Replaces ivoyager table of the same name. Game start only.

## strata.tsv

Specific geophysical layers for the purpose of defining Compositions (which define resources).

## surveys.tsv

Defines our knowledge about a body's composition/resources in a particular strata: both deposits (if applicable) and estimation errors.



